hey everyone I'm super excited to be
here so as the title suggests I'm going
to speak about the idea of sustainable
wearables and heirloom electronics so if
you go out shopping in America today for
clothes you will probably see a scene
very close to this one
surrounded by cheap clothes and lots of
them now I think this is a common
occurrence because of the economic
system we live in which is a capitalist
one but also other factors that are
largely part of that system so in this
presentation I'm going to explore where
capitalism has gotten the fashion and
the electronic industry and where we may
want to go from here as we push fashion
and electronics to merge so I'm gonna
start here before the Industrial
Revolution now before the 1800s all
clothing and textiles were handmade all
garments were cut all garments were cut
and sewn by women and the family or
community tailors then technological
inventions like this one the spinning
jenny came around in the 1700s which was
then followed by the sewing machine in
the 1800s and these kicked off the
Industrial Revolution so for the very
first time the creation of textiles and
clothing were leaving the home and being
housed under large factory roots
so when Industrial Revolution happens
this of course changed everything and
how fabric and clothing were produced
the first ready to wear clothing
collection was created which meant
standardized sizing and garments could
now be made in multiples and very
quickly so customization was starting to
be traded for efficiency and
sanitization now the sewing machine
became a very common household tool and
a really important skill to learn it
automated the chore of hand stitching
and brought the standardization of
Hut and so patterns to the home but
while still allowing for some
customization so desktop 3d printers and
the DIY movement have been talked about
as being part of a revolution that makes
the designer the producer and the
consumer all one person but the sewing
machine was really the first of its kind
to have this sort of impact
now although ready-to-wear clothing was
more available up until the mid 1900s
many clothes were still handmade in
contrast today we think of handmade
clothing as being too labor-intensive so
that usually equates to being too
expensive and it's more of a novelty
today to get something custom fitted and
made just for us men Dean used to be an
art it still is but it's just not
practiced very much a meticulous tailor
or seamstress could mend rips with
threads unraveled from hems
and seams and skillfully weave them into
tears that became practically invisible
like this so in the past the material
the cloth was worth more than labor so
it made sense to expand labor in order
to save the cloth and today clothing is
consumed is considered a consumable item
so the worth of this cloth or the
garment is not valued above the labor
and that it takes to mends anymore mass
manufacturing clothing is so inexpensive
that many people usually just go out and
buy a new piece of clothing rather than
spend the time to fix it if a button
pops off today or a shirt it gets a few
holes in it it's usually considered
ruined unwearable
and it's donated or thrown in the trash
so really our relationship with clothing
has changed when did this happen and why
did it happen when did clothing becomes
so expendable and when did fashion
designers become these demigods that
seemingly whipped clothing out of thin
air in the book overdressed by Elizabeth
Kline she starts with a history of the
department store and how it began to
become consolidated
she also points out that in the early
days of the American garment industry
clothing manufacturing was run by
independent almost mom-and-pop
businesses that sold through these
numerous department stores before they
became consolidated in the 1970s there
was a shopping mall boom and also the
disappearance of the middle class led
americans to start to embrace this kind
of crisis that they were finding in
department stores like Kmart and Walmart
so globalization was growing rapidly in
the eighties in the 90s and mid-priced
brands began to shift to the bulk of
their production to the developing world
where labor and overhead costs were
fractionally of anywhere else from the
end of the 1990s began brands began to
look for new ways to increase profits
and pricing battles ensued between
department stores aggressive ones and
they just started creating more and more
important prices more and more sales so
it came to me that the apparel industry
became synonymous with globalization
consolidation and the economics of
publicly traded companies so this brings
us to the recent has and in the last two
decades something totally remarkable has
happened and what I'm referring to is to
fast fashion this refers to the low cost
clothing collections that are usually
characterized
let's throw away these our clothing you
can find in places like H&M Zara and
forever21 these companies have a team of
designers that turn out 10,000 pieces of
clothing here in contrast to say one
luxury brand that used to or still does
create 100 pieces per year now the
fashion industry used to and it still
does but they only used to have
collections twice a year and that
spring/summer and that's on a maternity
but fast fashion and has created
something totally new and they've
collapsed the production line down so
they can produce up to 50 collections
here just churning out clothing into
their stores as tansy Hoskins put it in
her book stitched up quote fast fashion
is the result of competition having
driven suppliers shorter and shorter
supply times and the market is also
characterized by large international
corporations owning clusters of brands
and operating them internationally so I
think of having this experience with our
fashion and our clothing has really led
to a philosophy of constantly lending
and it's also led to a loss of
appreciation for craftsmanship and
clothing craftsmanship and quality when
it comes to clothing
now I worked as a clothing designer and
a pattern director and production
seamstress as well so you know I really
seen people first and scoff at prices
scoff at $30.00 for a shirt or anything
over and also
at any price is over $60 for a dress so
I think this is mainly because a lot of
us have website into what it actually
takes to produce the clothing that we
wear in the 10-point anti fashion
manifesto offered by Lee at in corn she
puts the way we value clothes and what
they have this symbolizes this quote
prices profess that these clothes are to
be thrown away discarded as a condom and
forgotten before being lovely savored
teaching young consumers that fashion
has no value the culture of fashion is
thus destroyed unquote it's a very
interesting read now technology has
always been in close relation with the
fabric and the garments that we were
weaving is one of the oldest crafts and
was among the first to become automated
the jacquard loom which is pictured here
was among the first uses of store data
and commercial production through the
use of punch cards you can see on the
front now interestingly enough the use
of punch cards these punch cards were
descendants of cars used in making
musical organs and music boxes and then
the sentence of these punch cards were
then used for mechanical calculating
machines and computer programming later
on so we know technology today I think
is consumer electronics these are our
personal computers
is Arduino microcontrollers and they're
getting smaller and more ubiquitous
wearable technology has also been around
longer than some of you may think for
example this one can't changer at the
pocket watch
but wearable electronics has really been
the one bounding out the gates and into
the eyes of the masses lately starting
their social and data logging
experiments and becoming the next new
market that companies are looking to get
involved with and identified so the
consumer electronics industry has some
parallels to the fashion industry that
I'd like to talk about now it doesn't go
as far back as the user need of clothes
it starts in the 1990s but they've also
become very personal and mobile and with
the production getting cheaper and
smaller electronics can be found in
almost everything around us so like
fashion it's one overriding
characteristic is the trend of ever
falling prices I think this is partially
driven by gains in manufacturing
efficiency and it's also personally
driven by making profit margins larger
every year so I also want to mention
planned obsolescence which is designing
too many of our electronic devices which
causes them to be throw away this
creates an excess of products just as an
example in one year in the u.s. we can
throw away 140 millions of
but ends up in the landfill so this is
another parallel to the fashion industry
and Vanessa Friedman the New York Times
fashion critic put it really well she
made the point that the driving force of
fashion is planned obsolescence which is
totally true if you think about it she
says something is in Benin it's out
skirts are up and they are down today
it's green
tomorrow glue which is self by
definition about something that is the
opposite of sustainable so e-waste is
dumped in places like Indian China and
the people who live there are ultimately
the ones who are made responsible for
extracting any valuable ore metals that
are recyclable which is a very difficult
process and a very toxic one as well so
we purchase over 80 billion pieces of
clothing each year which is 400% more
clothing today than we did 20 years ago
and sadly like most of our electronic
devices they also in Memphis access in
landfills so while working with wearable
electronics and indie textiles you get
the best of both worlds flexible fibers
with different qualifying properties and
the ability to run a signal through and
around places and materials that you
wouldn't normally cut to but with the
best you also get the worst which I've
already pointed on some of them so
precious metals are woven knitted and
embedded
many layers of natural synthetic and
hybrid materials and this ultimately
makes the Mosin fibers even more
difficult to separate so if not designed
with care that integration of these
metals with fibers can exacerbate an
already difficult recycling and reuse
process now electronics a new technology
is creeping into our lives more and more
I very recently just watched a talk
given by the subpoenaed Papadopoulos
just a few days ago and she really
happen to put some questions and
concerns I've been thinking about
recently extremely well so I'm gonna
share that with you and I'm probably
gonna paraphrase a bit so she asks if
wearable technology becomes part of our
everyday life then what kind of original
self do we wanted to promote what kind
of values what kind of idea of being
what kind of relationships can we make
can be made where value flows in all
directions and not just some how do we
make sure that we take care of each
other of our environment and everyone
you go and habits in what do we want
that to look like and how do we want to
make sure that everyone is valued I just
thought she really put that really well
so I'd also like to talk more about
value and some concepts of
sustainability that may help us to start
to address these questions I think in my
mind it really boils down to the fact
that we need to change our relationship
with our devices and the clothing that
we wear we may want to change what we
value about them other than the bottom
line or the next deal perhaps we need to
derive value from the narrative of the
reduction of the Garmon itself today
wireless technologies such as Bluetooth
and RFID memes are being developed and
they're being marketed to retail stores
right now for new shopping experiences
and also ways to event information into
garment or accessory and that's an
example scenario that's actually put out
by a company called anywhere who is
developing this technology they talk
about a scenario of when you're walking
down the street or say you're standing
in line for coffee and you see someone
who has a really cute purse and you're
thinking okay where did you get that
person I have to have one so instead of
actually asking her and if the purse has
a chip in it and you haven't downloaded
app you can stand at the purse and it
will pop up in the app and it will tell
you what color you can get it in where
to get it it gets on sale and you can
buy it right then and there so you buy
one for yourself one for your mom one
for your sister because it's a really
great deal so imagine that this
technology was flipped on its head and
instead of getting information about
where to buy the first and more like it
on sale you learn about who made it and
where they came from
so instead of educating the consumer on
the story of production and the people
behind it giving value to the voices and
stories to the hands that that made the
purse or the garment and perhaps even
what their specialty skills are and how
they applied it to crafting the details
you can
something so really gets you to look at
the objects that you're purchasing now
this would make production process
totally transparent and I bet large
Coulomb or it's my company thrilled to
do this of course at this time since a
lot of them tend to use their labor but
what if this could be a reality and who
would it be to push this concept in
front of people just just to let them
know that they may or they can value
something more than just a good deal so
what if this information also or instead
of tort told a narrative of the wear of
the garment allowing information to flow
across multi generations of families or
communities sharing stories memories of
where it was made within that small
community and remote local crops I think
interesting patterns may even emerge
telling the history and mythology's of
the community and add to the already
rich symbology that clothing provides
fashion as an art form is very important
like any art form it mirrors what's
going on in our communities and what's
going on in our times and it's something
that we hope are taken it's self
referential it's practical and as poetic
fabrics shield you from whether material
choices can communicate how rich you are
or how middle you make designs can
reflect a whimsical part of someone's
person
or if someone's lost some time a morning
deciding what to wear or not to wear it
can be politically revolutionary
clothing is already plenty smarter and
it already has a big function in society
and so recently what I found very
interesting is how introducing
technology and electronics can help
amplify or add or rather reintroduce
this richness that clothing possesses so
this is a project that's a favorite of
mine that uses this meta meta data
concept it's called spin and it creates
a narrative behind the creation of a
gift and this gift is an index card you
can embed photos and audio captured
along its journey of creation that you
can then share later on with the person
who receives the gift so I feel like
something like this could really change
our view of something from disposable to
a treasured heirloom something that can
be shared and passed on now sort of
mentioning that creating this metadata
would also be creating some serious
security risks which again is why I
think it's important to lift the hood of
how these things work and how production
works how things are made to help bring
them back to the community
and out of the conglomerate's grass so
another way I think technology today can
help perhaps change the way we value
things is the open-source culture it's
gone from sharing source code to an
ideology of collaboration transparency
and rapid prototyping in fashion and
textiles and electronics have followed
suit
designers are starting to offer a bill
of materials and instructions on how to
build knitting machines and looms that
allow the wear to create their own
clothing using digital files and
designers partly sourcing their fashion
collections you can download cut and put
together this collection called post
picked or even eliminate sewing through
a tab and slot interlocking system so
modularity is a concept also to be
looked at this is a modular phone made
by a company called faux box and their
motto is a phone worth keeping this
design allows the user to replace a part
of the phone if it wears out or breaks
camera a USB port the screen even which
happens love so instead of getting a
whole new phone you can just swap by
your screen or the module only and this
also leads to customizations who
as little or as many features as you
want people feel more personal so to
make things last
they must evolve and you know we don't
always want to be limited to where in
just a few garments for the rest of our
lives right people's taste and their
needs change so clothing and electronics
can evolve through something like a
modular system that I just showed but
they can also evolved by recycling
William McDonald and Michael Brown
guards book cradle-to-cradle
break and of use materials and abuse
product materials into two categories
the versus segment gold nutrients and
this is a synthetic material as
manufactured by humans like plastics and
metals that can be used many times over
but without a loss of quality is staying
within a continuous cycle of recycling
they use and the second is biological
nutrients and these are materials that
are organic and that can decompose into
the natural environment such as soil and
water they also go on to define the
mixture of these technical and
biological nutrients that they that
cannot be separated and recovered
products in life and they call these
products monster hybrids hybrids
typically also cannot be upcycle door
down cycles but instead end up in
landfills and incinerators so I think
this is where material innovation can
win this hand fabric from grown from
bacteria or fungi
that's biodegradable or you can using
common materials that we already have
such as cotton and wool and then couple
these biomaterials with the technical
material
such as metal so they can easily compose
or dissolve within a custom-built system
that then allows you to extract the
metals easily to use again and as we go
forward with 3d printed fashion maybe
looking more at using biodegradable
filament that can break down over time
so I think that overall getting people
more involved with the creation of their
clothing can cause them to value it
differently using animations like
virtual reality for example to imagine
different color designs that are
removable and 3d printed creating a
module environment that if you like the
color you can keep it or if you want to
swap it out for it a new one it can be
thrown in the garden into compost so
there are a lot of exciting
opportunities arising right now in the
fields wearable electronics and also
funding is happening right now that's
bringing it and and boosting
manufacturing on local soil so I just
think that this is a good time to start
thinking about how to make some
decisions of design that dynamo
sustainable ideology I've seen
innovation happen in small clusters only
to be brought to market by companies
that have more money to scale afterwards
and I've been within these small
clusters and I've talked to eleven
people
great colleagues and I've been said
Schengen to see what it would even take
to produce something that combines
electronics and fabric and it's nice for
my handful of manufacturers creating
textiles there isn't really anything
that existed together but with companies
like Google and Levi's creating project
jacquard for example and this
realization is now a goal and has the
money to back up so I think it just all
comes back to what would we like to see
become a new reality as we build these
new facilities and and create these
really exciting and innovating new
products or projects I'm not trying to
necessarily come with any easy solutions
for some of the world's really
large-scale problems but rather I just
wanted to come and share with you guys
some of the concerns and topics of
interest that I've been thinking about
and that I think are important to
consider as I see wearable electronics
begin to scale as an industry thank you